On April 25, 2015, a 7.6 Magnitude Earthquake struck the Gorkha district of Nepal followed by more than 300 aftershocks above 4 Magnitude and 4 earthquakes greater than 6 Magnitude. The aftermath of these events unveiled that 95% of completely damaged and 68% of partially damaged buildings were low strength masonry buildings. This highlights the vulnerability of masonry structures and the need for developing seismic resilience in rural masonry buildings. Base isolation has developed as an effective solution to minimize structural damage under severe seismic excitations. Elastomeric isolators, in particular, have been studied extensively in the past. However, their high cost and bulkiness make them unsuitable for rural masonry buildings. Sliding base isolators of the pure-friction (PF) type have emerged as a viable alternative since they adopt a cheap light-weight sliding interface between the superstructure and foundation. They have also been shown to perform well over a wide range of earthquake frequencies and provide a high degree of acceleration isolation.
Soil-structure interaction (SSI) generally increases the period of the structure and hence are often ignored in structural analysis. However, it is well-documented that SSI could have significant effects on short squat buildings on soft soils. Since PF base isolation is mostly geared towards low-rise rural buildings, there is a need for a detailed study of SSI on PF base isolation. In this study, we formulated a simple, continuous, analytical model and conducted parametric study of the effect of SSI on PF isolators over a wide range of near-fault and far-fault records. Transient response in terms of Inter-story Drift Ratio (IDR) and Peak Sliding Displacement (PSD) were obtained by direct integration using the Backward Differentiation Formula (BDF). It was found that SSI led to increase in PSD and residual displacement, which is crucial from a design standpoint. SSI had pronounced effect on IDR on soft soils at lower PGAs before the isolation could be activated. While PF isolation was slightly more effective in far-fault seismic records, it was observed that it effectively reduces structural response under near-fault ground motion better than conventional elastomeric isolators. Hence, at the cost of nominal residual base displacement, it could be a viable solution for short-rise masonry buildings.
